.. _module_authoring:

Developing ChopShop Modules
===========================

Introduction
------------

Creating ChopShop modules consists of creating a python file with a
unique name and placing it in the modules directory. This file must have
a .py extension in order to be recognized by the framework. ChopShop
works by calling functions with known names for given states and data
types. Before reading this document please read the chopshop\_usage
document to familiarize yourself with how modules are intended to be
used.

Quick Start
-----------

To get started quickly with creating a module, ChopShop provides a
simple shell script to setup a simple module stub for you. You can use
'newmod.sh' to create this stub and open an editor for you to get right
to work. The newmod.sh script takes two or three arguments. The first is
the name of the module you want to create and the second is a string
('tcp', 'udp', 'ip' or 'CUSTOM') depending upon the payload you intend
to parse. If you use 'CUSTOM' as the argument, the script will expect
another argument which is the 'type' you are trying to process, e.g.,
'http'. After creating the module stub and documentation file, the
script will open up your editor to allow you to write your module

 ./newmod.sh awesome\_decoder tcp

Primary vs. Secondary Modules
-----------------------------

ChopShop has two types of modules to supports its chaining functionality
called 'primary' and 'secondary'. The distinction is that primary
modules parse data that is considered a 'core' type within ChopShop,
specifically this would be tcp, udp, and ip. A module that processes a
module created type is considered secondary. The http\_extractor module,
for example is a secondary module as it only accepts 'http' type data.
It's important to note that since ChopShop supports ingesting multiple
types within a single module, a module can technically both be a primary
and secondary module -- but the distinction between primary and
secondary is generally a runtime distinction, as in what functions will
be called in either case. More on this will be covered below.

Module Structure
----------------

The following describes the required variables and functions that make
up a ChopShop module

Variables
~~~~~~~~~

Every module must define the following global variables:

"moduleName" -- The module name (string) [E.g., 'myawesomemodule']

"moduleVersion" -- The module version (string) [E.g., '0.1']

"minimumChopLib" -- The minimum version of ChopLib [E.g., '4.0']

Modules will not function without "moduleName". Any module that does not
define 'moduleVersion' or 'minimumChopLib' will be considerd 'legacy'
(pre 4.0) and will not be able to access module pipelining and some
other newer features.

Required Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Every module must define certain functions to enable functionality. Some
of these are absolutely mandatory and others are optional depending on
what you want your module to do.

ALL MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^

Modules must define the following functions to be used with ChopShop:

module\_info() -- invoked when a chopshop user uses the
-m/--module\_info flag, module may write out any information it wants to
inform the user of its functionality/usage by returning a string.

init(module\_data) -- Initialize the module, before processing any
packets.

::

    module_data is a dictionary with at least the following key(s):
        'args': an array of command-line args suitable to pass to
            the parse_args() function of an
            optparse.OptionParser() object.

    Returns: dictionary with at least the following key(s):
        'proto': Array of dictionaries linking input types to outputs
            E.g., proto = [ {'tcp' : ''}]
                  proto = [ {'tcp' : 'http'}]
            Note: 'tcp', 'udp', and 'ip' are considered pre-defined types and should
            not be used as return types. Also note that proto is an array and can take
            multiple associations.

    Optional: the return dictionary may also include:
        'error': indicates an error in the module has occured
                 set to a friendly string so that ChopShop can
                 inform the user

TCP MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^

| taste(tcp\_data) -- Called when a new stream is detected (SYN, SYN/ACK, ACK), but before any data is received.
|  Treat tcp\_data like the object sent to callbacks for nids' register\_tcp.
|  (ex: o.addr, o.client.count\_new, o.discard(0))

::

    Returns: True or False, specifying whether or not to further
            process data from this stream.

handleStream(tcp\_data) -- Treat this like the callback for
nids.register\_tcp(). Treat tcp\_data like the object sent to callbacks
for nids' register\_tcp. (ex: o.addr, o.client.count\_new, o.discard(0))

UDP MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^

handleDatagram(udp\_data) -- Called once per UDP datagram. Calling
udp.stop() tells ChopShop to ignore this quad-tuple for the lifetime of
the module. This is very different from TCP behavior, so be aware!

IP MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^

handlePacket(ip) -- handler for ip data -- refer to below structure to
understand what data is passed

SECONDARY MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handleProtocol(protocol) -- handler for secondary, module-defined types.
Refer to documentation above for the structure of data passed to this
function (more below on module chaning)

Optional Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Modules do not need to define the following functions but doing so
provides extra functionality or information.

ALL MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^

shutdown(module\_data) -- Called when ChopShop is shutting down; gives
the module one last chance to do what it needs to.

TCP MODULES
^^^^^^^^^^^

teardown(tcp\_data) -- Called when a stream is closed (RST, etc.) Treat
tcp\_data like the object sent to callbacks for nids' register\_tcp.
(ex: o.addr, o.client.count\_new, o.discard(0))

ChopShop Data Structures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

tcp\_data
^^^^^^^^^

The tcp data that is passed to modules contains the following elements:

addr - quadtuple containing source ip/port and destination ip/port same
as nids' addr

nids\_state - same as nids' state, using this should not generally be
necessary unless better granularity of the end state (in the teardown)
is necessary

client - object which contains information about the client

server - object which contains information about the server

timestamp - variable that contains the timestamp of this packet, same as
a call to nids.get\_pkt\_ts()

module\_data - dictionary that is passed back and forth and persists
data across the lifetime of a module

stream\_data - dictionary that is passed back and forther and persists
data across the lifetime of a stream

Along with the following functions

discard(integer) -- tells ChopShop that this module wants to discard
"integer" bytes of the stream, same as in nids

stop() -- tells ChopShop that this module no longer cares about
collecting on this stream -- only useful in handleStream

Both the client and server objects contain the following fields:

state

data

urgdata

count

offset

count\_new

count\_new\_urg

All elements are the same as described in nids/pynids documentation.

udp\_data
^^^^^^^^^

The udp\_data structure that is passed to functions contains the
following elements:

addr - quadtuple containing source ip/port and destination ip/port same
as nids' addr

data - array of UDP payload contents

timestamp - variable that contains the timestamp of this packet, same as
a call to nids.get\_pkt\_ts()

module\_data - dictionary that is passed back and forth and persists
data across the lifetime of a module

ip - array of IP layer and payload. This may be removed in future
versions, do not rely upon it

The udp\_data structure has the following functions:

stop() -- tells ChopShop that this quad-tuple should be ignored for the
lifetime of the module

ip\_data
^^^^^^^^

The ip\_data structure contains elements cooresponding to the ip header
spec:

version - The version of ip (note that libnids doesn't support v6 so
this should always be 4)

ihl - Internet Header Length

dscp - Differentiated Services Code Point

ecn - Explicit Congestion Notification

length - Total packet length including header and data (as according to
the packet)

identification - Identification field from packet

flags - Fragmentation Flags

frag\_offset - Fragmentation Offset

ttl - The Time To Live of the packet

protocol - The protocol this is carrying (e.g., icmp or tcp)

checksum - The header checksum

src - The ip source

dst - The ip destination

raw - This is the raw ip packet

addr - A quadtuple containing source and destination elements. Note that
the port values are blank.

ChopProtocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ChopProtocol base class is what secondary modules will receive
through the 'handleProtocol' function. It has the following elements:

addr - quadtuple containing source ip/port and destination ip/port same
as nids' addr

timestamp - variable that contains the timestamp of this packet, same as
a call to nids.get\_pkt\_ts()

module\_data - dictionary that is passed back and forth and persists
data across the lifetime of a module

type - variable specifying the 'type' of the data

clientData - arbitrary python data structure defined by primary modules
for data from the client

serverData - arbitrary python data structure defined by primary modules
for data from the server

\_teardown - (ChopLib 4.3+) variable that tells the framework that this
data should be forwarded to the teardown code of modules down stream.
The function setTeardown is provided as a convenience function for code
clarity. Data returned in tcp's handleTeardown is automatically marked
as teardown data.

Note that if you are creating a module that consumes data from another
module, you must refer to that modules documentation to see what their
instance of ChopProtocol contains!

Module Chaining
---------------

Taking all of the above into consideration, this section will cover how
module chaining is supposed to work from a module authors perspective.

Primary Modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Modules that ingest the core types 'tcp', 'udp', and 'ip' can return an
instance of ChopProtocol to be consumed by secondary modules. Before
use, ChopProtocol must be imported by doing:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   from ChopProtocol import ChopProtocol
   </pre>

To instantiate an instance of ChopProtocol you can do something like:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   myhttpinstance = ChopProtocol('http')
   </pre>

The argument passed to ChopProtcol is the 'type' of the data being
passed, in the above example, the data is of type 'http'.

After instantiating an object based on ChopProtocol you have access to
the following functions:

setAddr - Set the quadtuple containing source ip/port and destination
ip/port -- this will be auto set by the framework if you do not

setTimestamp - Set variable that contains the timestamp of the protocol
-- this will be autoset to the timestamp of whatever packet you return
data on if you do not set it

setClientData - Set the arbitrary data structure for the data coming
from the client

setServerData - Set the arbitrary python data structure for the data
coming from the server

setTeardown - (ChopLib 4.3+) Indicate this data should be forwarded to
downstream module's teardown functions.

Note that the format of ChopProtocol is not meant to be restrictive. You
can and should override or ignore some functionality if it doesn't fit
your model of how data should be handled (e.g., creating a 'data'
element instead of having client and server elements). Before returning
an instance of ChopProtocol it is recommended you familarize yourself
with internal structure of the class. It is also extremely important
that you thoroughly document the format and organization of the object
you return from your module.

\_clone function
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ChopLib requires the ability to create copies of ChopProtocol to provide
modules with their own unique copy. By default ChopProtocol contains a \_clone
function that uses copy's 'deepcopy' function. If your data (e.g., clientData
and serverData) are complex enough, this might not be enough to copy your data.
In these instances you should create an inherited class based on ChopProtocol
and redefine the \_clone function.

Secondary Modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to write a decoder for a protcol that runs on top of another
protocol, such as http, normally you would first parse the http traffic
out and then proceed to parse the protocol that you were actually trying
to decode. With module chaining, you can pass the data through a primary
module that takes tcp and turns it into http and then focus on only the
protocol you care about

As documented above, secondary modules have one function they must
define to handle data:

handleProtocol(protocol) -- Protocol data, partially defined by primary
module

Starting with ChopLib 4.3, you can optionally define the following to
handled 'teardown' data:

teardownProtocol(protocol) -- Protocol data, partially defined by
primary module

Secondary modules can further return data to be used by other,
downstream secondary modules by the same procedure as primary modules
for returning custom types.

Note that module authors writing secondary modules should refer to
documentation for primary modules since the organization, data, etc in
what is returned by a primary module many not conform to the default
ChopProtocol syntax.

The "chop" library
------------------

ChopShop provides the "chop" library for module usage to interact with
the outside world. This allows the module writer to worry less about how
to output data. The chop library provides output "channels" to allow you
to very easily output data to the location of the module invoker's
choosing. The following output channels are supported:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.prnt - Function that works similar to print, supports output to a gui, stdout, or a file depending on the users command line arguments
   chop.debug - Debug function that outputs to a gui, stderr, or a file depending on the users command line arguments
   chop.json - Outputs a json string based on an object passed to it, enabled if JSON output is enabled by the user
   </pre>

chop also provides the following other related functions:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.tsprnt - same as chop.prnt but prepends the packet timestamp to the string
   chop.prettyprnt - same as chop.prnt but the first argument is a color string, e.g., "RED"
   chop.tsprettyprnt - same as chop.tsprnt but the first argument is a color string, e.g., "CYAN"
   chop.set_custom_json_encoder - given a reference to a function will attempt to use it as a custom json encoder for all calls to chop.json
   chop.set_ts_format_short - accepts a boolean that enables short time format '[H:M:S]' (default is '[Y-M-D H:M:S TZ]')
   </pre>

DO NOT use python's regular "print" command.

The following colors are currently supported with chop.prettyprnt and
chop.tsprettyprnt:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   "YELLOW" - Yellow on a Black Background
   "CYAN" - Cyan on a Black Background
   "MAGENTA" - MAGENTA on a Black Background
   "RED" - Red on a Black Background
   "GREEN" - Green on a Black Background
   "BLUE" - Blue on a Black Background
   "BLACK" - Black on a White Background
   "WHITE" - White on a Black Background
   </pre>

Note that if a gui is not available or colors are not supported in the
terminal running ChopShop, chop.prettyprnt's functionality is equivalent
to chop.prnt.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

Using the chop library is pretty straightforward, if you want to output
regular text data just type:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.prnt("foo")
   chop.prnt("foo", "bar", "hello")
   chop.prnt("The answer is: %s" % data)
   </pre>

If you would like to mirror the functionality of python's print's
ability to supress the trailing '' added to output, you can do the
following:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.prnt("foo", None)
   </pre>

To color the data (for gui purposes) just type:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.prettyprnt("RED", "foo")
   chop.prettyprnt("MAGENTA", "bar")
   chop.prettyprnt("YELLOW", "bah", None)
   </pre>

If you would like to support outputting json data, you can utilize
chop.json to do so:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   myobj = {'foo': ['bar', 'bah']}
   chop.json(myobj)
   </pre>

If you feel the need to make your own custom json encoder, you can use
"chop.set\_custom\_json\_encoder(encoder\_function)" to customize how
the json will be output.

Note that the default json encoder does not support any non standard
types

File Saving
~~~~~~~~~~~

ChopShop provides a simple API for saving files using the chop.\*file()
family of functions. There are three functions in this family:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chop.savefile
   chop.appendfile
   chop.finalizefile
   </pre>

The definition of chop.savefile() looks like:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
       def savefile(filename, data, finalize = True)
   </pre>

To use chop.savefile() you provide the filename and the data. The
optional third argument (a boolean) is used to determine if the file
object should be kept open or closed. This allows you to do
(pseudo-code):

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   while (chunk_of_data = decode_some_data_from_pcap):
       if on_last_chunk:
           finalize = True
       else:
           finalize = False
       chop.savefile('foo', chunk_of_data, finalize)
   </pre>

If not given, the default behavior is to close the file object. Since
each file object is opened in write mode module authors need to be aware
of this behavior as it will overwrite any existing files with the same
name.

Similar to chop.savefile(), chop.appendfile() has the following
definition:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
       def appendfile(filename, data, finalize = False)
   </pre>

To use chop.appendfile() you provide the filename and the data. The
optional third argument (a boolean) is used to determine if the file
object should be kept open or closed. If not given, the default behavior
is to leave the file object open. Note, that unlike savefile, appendfile
opens files in "append" mode, so it will not overwrite any file that
already exists.

The last function in the file family is chop.finalizefile() -- as the
name implies, it allows you to finalize (or close) a file once you are
done with it. It has the following definition:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
       def finalizefile(filename)
   </pre>

If the filename given is not open, finalizefile will do nothing. Also
note that you can use savefile or appendfile to the same affect by
calling them with an empty string as the data and finalize set to True.
E.g.:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
       chop.appendfile(filename, "", True)
       chop.savefile(filename, "", True)
   </pre>

finalizefile gives you a shorter, quicker way to close the file that is
easier to see in code.

Note that as a module author you only provide the filename, not the full
path to the file you want created on disk. The full path is handled by
the -s argument to chopshop. For example:

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   chopshop -f foo.pcap -s "/tmp/%N" "gh0st_decode -s; awesome_carver -s"
   </pre>

This will make sure each carved file from gh0st\_decode go into
/tmp/gh0st\_decode and files from awesome\_carver will go in
/tmp/awesome\_carver. The other supported format string is "%T" which
will be translated into the current UNIX timestamp (/tmp/%N/%T would put
files in /tmp/module\_name/timestamp).

Binary Modules
______________

ChopShop 5.0 (BETA!) introduces the ability to use modules oriented around
processing binary data. This allows someone to extract information
from packet data and then further process that information, without
the context of a network connection. Further, the binshop program
allows you to call those binary-oriented modules directly on a
binary without the need for invoking chopshop, allowing you to
do the same work without providing a pcap to extract data from.


Binary modules are very similar to regular modules with a few
changes. Binary modules, like Secondary modules require an
init function and can take a shutdown function. To handle
binary data, a binary modules must define a 'handleData' function
which provides a ChopBinary data object. Binary modules can return
ChopBinary data if desired to allow other binary modules, downstream
to process the data.

Binary modules have access to the global 'chop' object, same as
traditional modules, allowing modules to output information
where required.

To allow the chaining of traditional ChopShop modules with these
binary modules, a ChopShop module must, in the 'proto' dict key,
indicate that an input will return binary data by using 'ChopBinary'
as the value. This will tell the framework that given this input, it might
return a ChopBinary object.

Binary modules, to differentiate them from traditional modules, are
located in the bin_modules directory and flags are available to
provide the location(s) of custom modules.

To use a binary modules in chopshop, the module name must be prefaced with
'b:' to indicate that this is a binary modules. Since technically you can
have a traditional and binary module with the same name, this should lessen
any confusion or misinterpretation.


Best Practices for Module Writing
---------------------------------

Module writers should follow the best practices outlined below:

-  Never use function calls that can adversely affect ChopShop or any
   other module.
-  Calls like sys.exit() should not be used as your module might kill
   ChopShop or affect another module.
-  If it is possible to determine early on if a flow is useful, do so.
-  Do not wait until teardown to examine a flow unless it is absolutely
   necessary.
-  Transaction based communication might require processing in the
   teardown.
-  Do not use globals, their usage and behavior can be unpredictable.
   Put them in module\_data or stream\_data where appropriate.
-  Use the code available in ext\_libs to reduce work and duplication.
-  Do not roll your own code if it exists already.
-  If you duplicate code often enough, take it out and put into the
   ext\_libs.
-  In the init if there's an error add a key 'error' to the dictionary
   you return to indicate there was an error and what the error is
   (error string).
-  If your module parses arguments please use OptionParser() in your
   init() function (or a function unconditionally called from init) to
   do so. This allows the -m argument to chopshop to print the
   appropriate usage for your module.
-  Never use any output functions like print or sys.stdout.write().
-  If you can, use chop.prettyprnt to stylize the data so it's easier to
   see and keep track of in the gui.

